managed to just engineer tofu that is so
so healthy that we can live off of it
maybe one day in the future he
speculates maybe one day they will in
contrast to meet in contrast to cheese
Oh will we are will scientists ever
discovered tofu in the future that's
healthier than meat or cheese that's
what he's waiting for
if you had to get up every morning and
reinvent civilization for yourself it
would be hard to be a civilized person
yes if you had to wake up every morning
and reinvent civilization that would be
hard
waking up every morning and saying hmm
cow milk on my cereal versus vanilla soy
milk on my cereal which one's it gonna
be that's really [ __ ] easy a bonus
Yin the question of the audience is way
more interesting than anything I've
heard herself or say in this topic so
veganism is a topic that means an awful
lot to me and I'm not going to be one of
those guys that you know goes in here
and tries to heckle people the way that
vegans often get a reputation of
militancy for and I think that that's
generally counterproductive but but my
question is people will often reason
their way to a moral position but you
don't see them adopt that moral position
in real life and I'm wondering why
there's that disconnect of reason and
application Robert Sapolsky in his
recent book talked about associating
things with disgust when it comes to
morality and there being you having to
do something to that effect
to actually apply morals that you reason
to I'm wondering what both of your
thoughts are about this it's hard to do
what you acknowledge is good that's
that's one question
whether or not veganism is actually the
most moral prescription I think we can
debate that but but do you have a sense
of of the the crazy problem that you you
know what you should be doing but you
find
hard to actually do yeah I think that is
part of the part of the human condition
and we we redo because we have these
built-in drives in relation to cow milk
really like really you can remember it's
not that long you can remember the
difference between the taste of cow milk
on breakfast cereal and soy milk on
breakfast cereal really like I think a
lot of people a lot of people are driven
by terrible dark passions I was working
out at the gym today
there I'm surrounded by good-looking
people a homeland and some hideously
ugly people both I should include both
feelings of attraction and repulsion
it's just curiosity you know some yeah
also just weird interesting people you
want to know what's a I'd say a goddamn
word anybody hey you know I I talked to
this one guy asked me to spot him or
somebody sums the other day guy talked
to me about doing push-ups asked for
advice don't push it but you know what I
mean sure I mean I think you know a lot
of people have biological urges that
don't fit that well into their daily
lives
okay you know what the best version that
you've wrought you've never been in the
situation having a crush on a co-worker
the office crush that's like you know
the millions of years of evolution and
running straight into you know all the
conventions of the workplace that's new
you've never you've never done that
right you know when I was in China for a
while I had I had a crush on a trainer
at the gym
oh you know what whatever I call it like
you know woman who worked at the gym
yeah no I know but your personal trainer
but she's also like a manager that kind
of thing and you know there are real
limits modern modern society plays
limits on those things
but both in terms of the desire burning
in the human heart and the type of
gratification that comes from shall we
say giving into that desire yeah I can't
put it at all when they say okay you
know another one this is really foreign
to me I'm not this kind of guy
what about revenge well I mean if you
read any ancient literature anything
ancient Greek ancient Roman ancient
Indian but I think the whole
in China each in Japan everywhere I've
read literature from him leaving out a
whole bunch of places but I mean revenge
the culture of range of desiring and
yearning for revenge and then modern
society making revenge impossible that
you have a literature degree sorry my
girlfriend off camera you know you must
have read literature I mean revenge is
such a huge every form Russian
literature English literature that's I
mean to what extent that's biology or
works then it's just it's just desire
whatever says just yearning and then I
mean basically a modern society there is
absolutely no acceptable form of revenge
neither petty nor profound you know
neither legal nor illegal you know and
again that can be in the workplace
pardon me it can be in the workplace
people can be wanting to get revenge on
a co-worker or their boss or you know
their employee yeah but you know and
there's so there's a strong desire there
and there's for most people there's a
sense of gratification when it comes
I've really never been a revenge guy
that would be a separate video like why
that is about me or like what you know
you know you look back and it's like
maybe I should be you know like maybe
maybe the revenge people know something
I don't like really I don't I don't even
think I'm morally superior it's just to
some extent how I'm wired and how I've
lived my life and stuff I haven't I
haven't been about revenge um yeah that
would be a separate video though but
okay any of these things reproduction
through revenge I understand you know in
this kind of frankly [ __ ] uh you
know generalizations they're making
about you know the struggle between
believing what's in what's morally right
having a sense more than what you
actually yearn to do you know if
somebody murdered your father in front
of your eyes and you want revenge so any
any literature any school philosophy
industry those are the kinds of problems
people did with you know that kind of
thing these this is not nothing but the
difference between having your breakfast
cereal with cow milk versus soy milk
what the [ __ ] bro like how weak are you
you know it like being a vegan today in
2018 it doesn't even require any of the
moral fiber that it required you know a
few decades ago
when when your diet really would have
been broccoli and lentils when you
couldn't buy like soy ice cream you know
like if you didn't make it yourself
there was no way you could today you can
get it everywhere you know oh oh the
difference between coughs cream and soy
ice cream I by the way I'm not someone
who likes ice cream to begin with I
really dislike Cal ice cream anyway you
know most of this stuff oh oh life
without omelets you know I you know I
just I just don't see it I just don't
see it and again you know you my
girlfriend off-camera she's seen 899 out
of my 900 videos at this point it's
nothing we could use examples of cocaine
but look okay let's let's take the high
road here you know what about the
yearning to write your own memoir to
write your autobiography what about the
yearning of the poet to write poetry or
to have his poetry find an audience to
have recognition for his art form the
yearning of the painter to paint there
were powerful desires not all of them so
dark and terrible just the context of
this discussion is supposable giving in
to your dark and terrible orders there
are things that really drive people I
mean I was I was really driven to study
Korean a jib way I was really driven to
study pally pal he's an obscure language
from Southeast Asia a language say
nothing about I was really you know
driven to do humanitarian work and stuff
and when you have those passions this is
also very crypto Buddhist of me but you
know the more passions you have even if
they're there positive socially
sanctioned passions they're there you
know
regarded positively in our society
there's a lot of suffering you know
there's a lot of suffering on that road
we presumably saw that you're passionate
about but this this it's it's just so
weak to me I can't if these are
middle-aged man's sam harris is fully
fifty years of age you know okay you're
talking to a 12 year old you're talking
to a 15 year old and if a 15 year old
says to you they don't know if they can
live without chocolate ice cream okay
bro you're 15 you don't know that much
about what living with [ __ ] is like and
you don't know that much about what
living without [ __ ] is like 50 year old
grown-ass man with a PhD and a whole
bunch of pretentious publications about
Buddhist philosophy
written out of his ignorant ass this is
really low this is really weak to me
like the taste of meat like like a lot
of things that we can't justify and it's
a question of a combination of
self-control and norms that we share
that push us away from urges that we
cannot justify that is one part of our
really briefly I think this is the
weakest area philosophy there's a quote
from Karl Marx that is in some ways
completely untrue where he says the
purpose of philosophy is not to describe
the world but to change it I do think
there is a trap people can fall into
where they're offering philosophical
generalizations that sort of absolutely
no purpose aside from a descriptive one
I'm like you know do you want to
describe to me what the purpose of a fly
belt is in a car engine you know he's
like oh yeah how does the drivetrain
connect to that no come on my dude this
is this is actually the opposite of
analysis this is really the opposite of
philosophy in the meaningful sense what
you're doing here it's one part of our
of human nature namely you don't want to
be looked down upon by the people you
respect can push back against another
namely you you enjoy activities that you
can't justify that's all he has to
[ __ ] say that's all he has to say
sorry it's mind blow that's just mind
blowing to me but in whatever a lot of
work that we can't individually do right
so it's it's just it's hard if you had
to get up every morning and reinvent
civilization for yourself it would be
hard to be a civilized person yes if you
had to wake up every morning and
reinvent civilization that would be hard
waking up every morning and saying hmm
cow milk on my cereal versus vanilla soy
milk on my cereal which one's it gonna
be that's really [ __ ] easy it's
really [ __ ] easy for a rich pampered
piece of [ __ ] famous for no [ __ ]
reason Vanity PhD ignorant ass
[ __ ] who all makes up [ __ ]
about the Pali Canon out of his ass
never learned to read the power of
language has absolutely no credentials
in Buddhist meditation and publishes one
pretentious self-indulgent eBook after
another because nothing
praising the liberal media because
apparently he's the only guy who is um
pro-gun control and Pro Airport checks
and some others just slightly
conservative [ __ ] while also being a
a theist I me up a public voice for a
theater Sam Harris has had the easiest
[ __ ] ride in the mainstream media Sam
Harris has had less scrutiny than Donald
Trump in his election I mean there is no
scrutiny of this man's values to the
ultimate free ride but he did at several
points go out of his way to preach
veganism and then went out of his way to
backpedal and make excuses for why he
couldn't follow through and this is it
it would just be so hard to wake up in
the morning and reinvent civilization
that would be hard and that's wildly
irrelevant you're dodging and Sam I
don't even know if you really understand
what it is you're dodging it couldn't
come a time but we will look back on the
details of factory farming and it'll be
like looking back on in the future we
can look back equals factory farming and
think about Tim was and you can wake up
every morning and drink cow milk and eat
steaks for no [ __ ] reason I don't I'm
G who can see the hypocrisy in this
position the relatively distant past and
so morality is something we apply to the
distant past got it got it
ethics doesn't have to do with the
decisions we make over things we can
control here in our decisions we can
make your renow outcomes we're giving
here now it's something we reserve for
passing judgment on the distant past
deep deep Sam deep so I think there's an
interesting ethical wrinkle with respect
to the prospect of farming in such a way
that the the lives of farm animals are
net positive we're really not disputing
farming though are we
like you don't own a farm Sam and you're
not about to influence or change
anything on the farm like really this is
another dodge you even feel you're well
we're we're discussing you as a consumer
and you as a self-identified self-styled
ethical philosopher and leader
what difference you can make and one of
the differences you can make right now
is it hearing to a vegan diet that you
yourself repeatedly said is ethically
superior to the dietary choices you make
right so that it's better to have it
existed as a cow than to have not
existed at all and if we have some sense
that these are indeed happy cows well
then it would be better to raise them
and treat them well and then finally eat
them then it would be deeply immoral
even that perspective do we exist to
vindicate the lives of the Bears and the
Lions is the purpose of humanity to
bring meaning to the lives and deaths of
bears and lions and wolves no role is
not to imbue their lives with meaning or
value our role is to get out of their
way and let them live and die in the
wild you know to have all the joys and
all the sorrows of being wild animals
not to have them live in a steel cage
under a steel sky where there oh my god
forcibly impregnated have their babies
stolen from them killed and eaten to be
milked etc etc the unspeakable evils
effect reforming and also not to have
cushions and carpeting added to that
concrete floor in the steel factory to
make you feel better about your
ludicrous impossible to justify dietary
choices Sam oh wow he's on the wrong
foot he's on the wrong foot to an
unbelievable extent you finally eat them
than it would be to do not have done any
of that and managed to just engineer
tofu that is so so healthy that we can
live off of it maybe one day in the
future he speculates maybe one day they
will in contrast to meet in contrast at
cheese Oh will we or will scientists
ever discovered tofu in the future
that's healthier than meat or cheese
that's what he's waiting for
do you think it's gonna be 2030 you
think he's gonna be an old gray man he's
your micro think they finally came out
with that new tofu I mean it was a close
thing I mean like over here you have
bacon you just look at the macros and
how the bags are being over here you
have tofu hmm
do you think he's even aware of the
extent that he's lying I think he's
being dishonest
you know most of all with himself you
know so I think it's it's it's an
interesting ethical problem but I would
certainly acknowledge that what we have
currently is not like that and that it
is a horror show that's a wrap
[Music]
evolution